Fyodor Dostoevsky was a Russian writer best known for his philosophical novels Notes from the Underground (1864), Crime and Punishment (1866), and The Brothers Karamazov (1880). 
With his contemporary Friedrich Nietzsche, Dostoevsky was one of the first excavators of nihilism. His work explores how utilitarian and rationalist thinking deprived humanity of
spiritual enlightenment, an ultimate reason for existence that could justify the fact of human suffering.

Dostoevsky’s life was consumed with suffering. After exploding onto the Russian literary scene with Poor Folk in 1846, Dostoevsky joined the Petrashevsky circle, a seedbed of revolutionary ideas. The Russian
tsar cracked down and in 1849 Dostoevsky was arrested. He and his fellow prisoners were brought to a square where preparations were made for their execution. Just as the order to fire was to be given, a writ of clemency arrived.
Dostoevsky eventually served four years of penal labor in Siberia and then was forced to serve in the tsarist military. He only returned to Petersburg after a full pardon in 1859.

In Siberia, Dostoevsky received a copy of the New Testament that he carried the rest of his life. Upon release, he wrote to the woman who had given him the Bible that amidst the horrific sufferings of prison life

one thirsts like “parched grass” for faith and finds it precisely because truth shines in misfortune. I will tell you regarding myself that I am a child of the age, a child of nonbelief and doubt up till now and even (I know it)
until my coffin closes.

And yet, Dostoevsky continued, he had moments of clarity in which he knew that “there is nothing lovelier, deeper, more sympathetic, more rational, more manly, and more perfect than the Savior.” Even if he knew
that the Christ were a lie, he writes, “I should prefer to stay with Christ and not with truth.” Dostoevsky saw that his “thirst” for belief would continue to cost him “terrible torments” (Sandoz 2000: 45–6). There is no more abiding
theme in Dostoevsky’s fictional writing than the fact of suffering, the inability of reason and science to alleviate or justify that suffering, and the yearning for redemption through faith.

In Notes from the Underground, Dostoevsky depicts a “sick man” who refuses to cure his suffering. Even though he desperately wishes to take revenge, he doubts his right to vengeance.
Impotent to enact what he desperately wants, the underground man is humiliated. And yet, he finds joy in his humiliation. For in ruminating on his self-inflicted agony and impotence to take revenge, he experiences freedom.
Our powerlessness is, paradoxically, evidence of our human freedom to sacrifice happiness for agony. Unlike the Christian rejection of revenge from out of love, the underground man revels in his impotence, which serves as
joyful evidence of his freedom to choose moral suffering over happiness.

The underground man knows that the freedom he finds is fictive. The retreat to the underground is a flight into the world of books and dreams. We modern men, he says, have “grown so unaccustomed” to life that “we feel a
sort of loathing for “living life” (Dostoevsky 1994: 129). We live underground and agree that the dream is better than life itself. Some, like Ivan Karamazov and Raskolnikov, may seek to liberate themselves from these ideas,
but they will return to morality even when they know it a fiction. We don’t have the strength to live without our moral fictions. And so we live underground, with our dreams of justice and revenge, dreams we disbelieve.

In Crime and Punishment, redemption of suffering through faith is exemplified by Raskolnikov’s tortured acceptance of his crime. Raskolnikov murders simply to prove that he is an extraordinary, not a louse; to show he
is one for whom “everything is permitted” (Dostoevsky 1993: 274). The philosophy that everything is permitted is affirmed as well by Ivan Karamazov in The Brothers Karamazov, and is the pure expression of the unlimited nature
of utilitarian, utopian, and rationalist thinking that Dostoevsky most fears. If everything has its price and the end justifies the means, then nothing is forbidden. Yet, Raskolnikov is unable to live with himself as a murderer. He
seeks salvation in a life of suffering, affirming the moral vision he disdained by prostrating himself to live humbly as a human being.

The Brothers Karamazov offers Dostoevsky’s greatest exploration of the mysteries of suffering and redemption in the chapters on “Rebellion” and “The Grand Inquisitor.” In “Rebellion,” Ivan argues that the suffering of
children proves that the world has no meaning and no justice. Suffering calls out for retribution, and yet vengeance will never make right the suffering of innocents. Against the Christian theodicy, that suffering is for the
higher good and harmony of the world, Ivan rebels: “I don’t want harmony, for love of mankind I don’t want it. I want to remain with my unrequited suffering. I’d rather remain with my unrequited suffering and my
unquenched indignation even if I am wrong” (Dostoevsky 1990: 245). The price for harmony is the acceptance of suffering as sensible and justified. For Ivan, the price of harmony is too high. Not even God can justify unjustified
human misery.

“The Grand Inquisitor” – presented as a poem created by Ivan – is the highest statement of the nihilistic atheism against which Dostoevsky struggles. Christ returns to heal the sick and is arrested by the Grand Inquisitor
who accuses Christ of giving humanity freedom rather than bread. What Christ taught human beings was pride in their freedom. But humans don’t want freedom, and their pride leads them to suffer when they realize, like
Raskolnikov and the underground man, that they are really just lice, no better than beasts. What is needed, what the church has done, the Grand Inquisitor tells Christ, is to prove to the people that they are feeble and pitiful children,
but that a child’s happiness is sweeter than freedom. Dostoevsky’s answer to rebellion and utilitarian nihilism is offered through an encounter with a heretical Russian monk, the Elder Zosima: “I will embrace suffering and
begin to live” (Dostoevsky 1990: 308).